Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab. This is
a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please
subscribe to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and share
the video to help spread this free series of
videos. Thanks for your help. Also, remember
to sign up via the link in the description to
get all of the lab files for this course, so
you can try it out yourself in packet tracer.
If you want more labs like these, I highly
recommend picking up Boson’s NetSim for the CCNA.
It’s a network simulator with tons of guided
labs covering all of the topics you need to
know for the CCNA. Click the link in
the video description to check it out.
In this lab we’ll configure dynamic NAT as well
as PAT. This is the same network topology as in
the previous lab, so let’s get right into it.
In step 1 I’ll configure dynamic NAT on R1.
First let me configure the inside and outside
interfaces. ENABLE. CONF T. INTERFACE G0/0.
This is the external interface, connected
to the Internet, so IP NAT OUTSIDE. Then,
INTERFACE G0/1. IP NAT INSIDE. Now, I want to
translate all traffic from 172.16.0.0/24, so
let me create an ACL that matches that source IP.
EXIT. ACCESS-LIST 1 PERMIT 172.16.0.0 0.0.0.255.
So, anytime PC1, 2, or 3 sends traffic out
to the Internet, R1 will translate it. Next
I’ll create the address pool. The instructions
say to create a pool with just two addresses,
100.0.0.1 and 100.0.0.2. So let’s make
it. IP NAT POOL, and I’ll name it POOL1,
then 100.0.0.1 100.0.0.2, then NETMASK, and I’ll
just specify /24, 255.255.255.0, because the
instructions say ‘from the 100.0.0.0/24 subnet’.
Finally, I’ll configure the NAT statement itself.
IP NAT INSIDE SOURCE LIST 1 POOL POOL1. So,
R1’s dynamic NAT configuration is now complete.
Next, let’s try to ping google.com from the
PCs. First, PC1. Actually, I’ll just ping the
DNS server, 8.8.8.8, first. PING 8.8.8.8. I just
want to make sure all the devices finish the ARP
process first, as I’ve said many times before
it can be a little slow in packet tracer.
Okay, now let’s ping google.com. PING google.com.
Okay, the ping works. Now I’ll do the same on PC2.
PING google.com. It works here too. Finally, PC3.
PING google.com. No response on PC3, why is that?
Well, I only configured two public IP addresses
in the NAT pool, and they are currently being
used by PC1 and PC2, so PC3 can’t get a public
IP address. Let’s check the translations on R1.
DO SHOW IP NAT TRANSLATIONS. Okay, so there are
lots of translations here, notice that 172.16.0.1
has been mapped to 100.0.0.1,
and .2 has been mapped to .2.
Now, the output in packet tracer is a little
different than I demonstrated in the lecture
video. We have ICMP entries and UDP entries,
but the simple inside local to inside global
mappings I showed in the lecture video aren’t
entered into the table. Just be aware that
packet tracer doesn’t always operate exactly as
real Cisco IOS will, and don’t worry about it.
In the CCNA exam you might be asked to interpret
the output of a NAT table like this, but you won’t
be asked something like ‘which entries will
be in the NAT table if PC1 pings the server?’.
Okay, so in step 3 we are going
to change the configuration to PAT
using R1’s public IP address,
the one on its g0/0 interface.
First I’ll clear the translations. DO CLEAR
IP NAT TRANSLATION, and then an asterisk. Now,
the instructions say to remove the current NAT
configuration, but let me show you something.
DO SHOW RUN | INCLUDE NAT. Okay, so we have the
command IP NAT INSIDE SOURCE LIST 1 POOL POOL1.
Now, without deleting that I’ll enter IP NAT
INSIDE SOURCE LIST 1 INTERFACE G0/0 OVERLOAD.
And now let’s check the running-config again. DO
SHOW RUN | INCLUDE NAT. The previous NAT statement
has been replaced, so there isn’t actually any
need to remove the old configuration first.
Although, the pool still remains so you
can remove that too if you want. Okay,
so that’s all we need for the PAT configuration,
I specified INTERFACE G0/0 OVERLOAD so R1 should
translate all traffic from 172.16.0.0/24 to the
IP address of its g0/0 interface, 203.0.113.1.
Let’s try it, I’ll ping google.com from
each PC again, PC1 first. PING google.com.
Okay, and then PC2. PING google.com. Next
PC3, let’s see if the ping works this time.
PING google.com. Okay, this time it works. Now
let’s check the translations on R1 once more.
DO SHOW IP NAT TRANSLATIONS. Notice that all of
the inside local addresses, 172.16.0.1, 2, and 3,
are translated to the inside global address
203.0.113.1. R1 uses the protocol and port numbers
to keep track of the different communication flows
between the PCs, the DNS server, and google.com.
Okay, in this lab we configured
dynamic NAT using a NAT pool,
and then changed it to PAT
using R1’s interface IP address.
That’s all for this lab. Next let’s take a look at
a bonus lab in Boson Software’s NetSim for CCNA.
Before finishing today’s video I want
to thank my JCNP-level channel members.
To join, please click the ‘Join’ button under the
video. Thank you to Anand, Pavel, Abraham, Serge,
Njoku, Viktor, Roger, Raj, Kenneth, Seamus, H
W, Brandon, Aaron, Marcel, Kone, Donald, C Mohd,
Gustavo, Anthony, Benjamin, Justin, Prakaash,
Nasir, Erlison, Marko, Daming, Ed, John,
Funnydart, Velvijaykum, Mark, Yousif,
Boson Software, Devin, Lito, Yonatan,
and Vance. Sorry if I pronounced your name
incorrectly, but thank you so much for your
support. This is the list of JCNP-level members at
the time of recording by the way, March 25th 2021.
If you signed up recently and your name isn’t
on here don’t worry, you’ll be in future videos.
Thank you for watching. Please
subscribe to the channel,
like the video, leave a comment, and share the
video with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links in the
description. I'm also a Brave verified publisher
and accept BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips
via the Brave browser. That's all for now.